# A  Beginner Guide For Postman
## Introduction

Postman is a simple but powerful tool that helps developers test, organize, and understand APIs without stress. 
Instead of writing long curl command code just to see how an APIs works, you can use postman's clean interface to send request, view responses and even save everything in one place.

## 2. Getting Started With Postman
Think of postman like your control room it's where you can send requests, and receive responses.

### 1. Setting Postman Up
To get started:
- Go to https://www.postman.com/downloads/ 
- Download the version for your operating system (Windows, MacOS, or linux).
- Once installed, open it you will then be asked to sign in or create an account.
(signing in helps you save and sync your work across all devices ).

If you get a pop up about your window firewall, just allow postman on both private and public networks (like home and work).

 This ensures that it can send request properly

### 2. Understanding the interface
When you open the postman , the layout might seem a little bit intimidating, but here is what matters most;

- Request Builder:
This is the big box at the top, Here you eneter your API URL (the endpoint) and choose the method (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE eTC) from the drop down.

- Params, Auth, Headers, Body Tabs:
These tabs below the request bar let you customize your request for example, adding parameters, authentication keys, or JSON data.

- Send Button:
Once everything is set, hit SEND to make your request.

- Response Section:
This is where the API's reply appears it could be JSON data, an error message, or status codes like 200 OK, 404 Not Found. etc.

### 3. Creating your first workspace
A workspace is simply a project space. A place to organize your API requests and collections.

You can:
- Create a personal workspace for your learning or projects.

- Or collaborate with others (once you are more advanced)
For now you can just stick to your personal workspace, it's private and perfect for experimentation.

## 3. Making Your First Request
Now that you have your postman all setup , lets make your first API request. we will be using JSONPLACEHOLDER a free test API. It's perfect for practIce as it does not require any authentication or setup.

### - Step 1 : Open a New request tab 
Once you open postman click "+New tab" at the top . This open  a blank request window where we will enter our first API endpoint.

### Step 2: Choose the request type.
On the left of the reuest bar, you will see a drop down that says GET. Leave it as GET for now, this is the request type used to retrieve data.

### Step 3: Enter your url
In the request box paste this endpoint:

``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1 ``` 
This is simply asking the server to return the post with ID 1.

### - step 4 : Hit send
click the send button on the right side
After a few seconds you will see a JSON response appear in the bottom panel. It should look smething like this
``` 
JSON
{
    "userId": 1,
    "Id": 1,
    "title" : "sunt aut facer repellat provident occaecati excepturi optio reprehenderit",
    "body": "quita et suscipit suscipit recusandea"
} 
```

### - step 5: Understanding what happened 

what you just did was make a GET request to the server. the server received your request, processed it, and sent back a response containing data in JSON format, a structure most APIS used in exchanging information. 

## 4. Working With POST Requests
So far you have see how to send a simple get request, whcich is basically used to fetch data from an API using jsonplaceholder. But what if you want to send request instead? That's where POST request comes in.
Here's how to it in postman

### - Step 1
Create a new request
- Open postman and click +New Tab or New Request
- Set the method to POST from the dropdown next to the URL bar.

### - Step 2
- Enter your endpoint (URl)
- For practice, you can use this public test API
``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com.posts ```
### - step 3
- Go to the "body" tab
- Select raw.
- Choose JSON from the dropdown that says Text
- Now you can type or paste your data in JSON format. Example

``` 
{
    "title":"postman beginner guide",
    "body": Learning how to make POST requests",
    "userId":1
}
``` 
### Step 4 
- Click "send"
- postman will send your data to API, you should see a response like this 
```
{
    "title": Postman Beginner Guide",
    "body": "Learning how to make post requests",
    "userId": 1,
    " Id": 101
}  
```
- The id is usually generated by the server to show that your new data was created.

### - Tip
If your POST request doesn't go through, double check:
- The method is set to POST not GET 
- You have selected raw-JSON in the Body tab.
- Your JSON data is properlly formated (postman highlight error in red).
## 6. PUT, PATCH and DELETE Requests
So far you have learned how to use GET to retrieve data and POST to create data.
But what happens when you need to update or delete something that already exist?
Thats where DELETE, PUT and PATCH comes in.
Let's break them down :

### - PUT Request - Full update
A put request is used to completely replace a resource in the server. Think of it like overwriting an enetire file. Basically new data replces old one.

Example endpoint
``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1 ```

### Steps
1. Set method to PUT
2. Use the url above. Note the (/1) at the end means we are updating the post with ID 1.
3. Go to the body tab - select raw- choose JSON
4. Paste this sample data:
```{
    "Id": 1,
    "title": "updated post title",
    "body": "This is the updated conetent for post 1",
    "userId": 1
}
```
5. Click send 
You will get a response showing the updated data, confirming that your put request worked.

- Tip : With put the server expects all field , even if only one changed , if you omit a field it might be replaced with null or default values.

### PATCH Request - Partial update 
A patch request is used when you only want to update a specific fields of a resource.
It is lighter and faster than PUT because it only changes what you send 
Example endpoint:
``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1```

### Steps:
1. Set the method to PATCH
2. In the Body tab, use this :
``` {
    "title": "only the title was updated"
}
```
3. Hit send 
You will see that only the title field changes. The rest of the points stays the same.

### DELETE Request- Removing a Resource
Finally, the DELETE request is used to remove a resource from the server.
Example endpoint:
``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1 ```

### Steps 
1. Set the method to delete 
2. Paste the url above 
3. Click send 
You should see an empty response ({}) or a confirmation message  depending on the API, meaning the deletion was sucessful.
- Note: Most real- world APIs require authentication (like an API key or token) to perform delete operations.

## 7. Using Parameters
When working with APIs , you will need to send extra information along with your request. For example to get data for a specific user or to filter results. That is where parameter comes in.
There are two types of parameters in postman:
- Path Parameters - this are part of the URL itself.
- Query Parameters- these are added after (?) in the URL or modify the request
Lets get through both

### - Path Parameters
Path parameters are used when the API endpoint itself changes depending on what you are trying to acess 
Think of it like a navigating through folders , each path points to a specific resource.
Example endpoint:
``` https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1 ```

Here, the 1 at the end is the path parameter, meaning you are asking for the post with ID 1.

### steps
1. Set methods to GET
2. Paste the URL above in postman
3. Click Send.
You will get a response showing only the post with the userID 1.
- Tip: path parameters usually represent IDs. Things like users/5 or comments/10

### - Query Parameters 
Query parameters lets you filter or sort data without changing the base URL. 
They are added after a (?)seperated by (&) if there are multiple.

Example endpoint :
```https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts?userId=1 ```
Here you are asking the API: "show me only the posts that belong to user 1."
### steps :
1. Set the method to GET.
2. Use the url above.
3. Hit send.

You will get all list of posts by user 1.
You can also add query parameters directly inside postman without typing them in the URL.

1. Go to the param tab
2. In the key field , type userId
3. In the value field, type 1.
4. Postman automatically adds ?userId=1 to your URL.

- Tip: Query parameters are super handy for searching , filtering, or customizing results. For example:
1. /products?category=shoes
2. /users?limit=5&sort=asc

## 8. Headers and Authentication
So far, you have been making requests freely to public APIs like JSONPLACEHOLDER, no sign-in, no keys, nothing. But in real world , most APIs need authenticaton to verify who you are before you can have access.
That is where headers and authentication tokens comes in.

### What are Headers?
Headers are like the metadata of an API request- extra information that helps the server understand what you are sending and how to handle it.

some common examples:
| Header|      Description | 
|------------|--------------------------|
| content-type| Tells the server what kind of data you are sending (e.g application/json)   |
| Authorization  | Used to send authentication tokens or API keys | 
|Accept|Tells the server what kind of response format you are expecting. |

In postman you can find the Headers tab next to the Body and Param.

### Adding Headers in Postman
Let's try adding a simple header manually:

1. Go to postman and open any request (e.g GET https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/1).
2. Click on the Headers tab
3. In the key field, type:

``` content-type```

4. In the Value field, type:

``` application/json```

5. Hit send 
You won't see a big difference in this example since JSONPLACEHOLDER does not require authentication, but that is how most real life API expect structured communication.

### What is Authentication ?
Authentication simply means proving your identity before acessing restricted or private area.
It's like showing your Id card to get into a building, in this case it's how the API know if you are allowed to be there.

The most common methods are :

- API keys
- Bearer token (personal acess tokem)

OAuth (used by platforms lke Google, Github , and Twitter)

Example; Authenticating with Github API
Now let's look at a real example using Github's API.

Github requires you to authenticate before accessing personal data like your repositories.

### Steps
1. Go to Github- settings-developer settings- personal acess tokens
2. Create a new token with read;user and repo permissions
3. Copy token (keep private)
4. In postman:
- set your request to

``` GET https://api.github.com/user```

- Go to the Authentication tab
- Choose Bearer Token as the type
- Paste your Github token in the token field.
5. Click send 
If done correctly, you will get a 200 OK response- with your Github profile details in the response body.

- Always keep your token save. Never share with anybody!!!

## 9. Collections and Enviromental variables
By now , you know how to make requests in postman. But as you start working with multiple APIs and endpoints , things can get messy. That's where collection and enviromental variables comes in handy.

### Benefits
- Keep request organized by project or API.
- Share request with teammates
- Run multiple requests automatically with the collection runner.

### steps to create a collection
1. Click New- collection
2. Give your collection a name (e.g, "JSONplaceholder practice").
3. Drag and drop requests into collections or create new ones directly inside it.
4. Save after making changes

- Tip:
Collections are greate for projects. For example , if you are testing a blog API, you could have a collection with GET posts, POST new posts, PUT updates, DELETE posts, etc.

### Enviromental variables -Making values dynamic 
Sometimes you use the same value repeatedly, like API keys, URLs, userId, etc. Instead of typing hem everytime, postman lets you create enviroment variables

Example:
- Base url : https://jsonplaceholde.typicode.com
- API key : 123h45b
Instead of typing them in full everytime you can just use

``` {{base_url}}/posts/1```
Postman will automatically replace {{base_url}} with https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com

### Steps in creating enviromental variables:
1. Click the Enviroment tab on the left side
2. Click add (or create Enviroment)to make new enviroment 
3. Give your enviroment a name e.g Local API Test.
4. Add variable names and values.

Example:
|variable|         value|
|---------------|---------------|
|base_url| https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com|
|       |    |
- You can add multiple variables for things like tokens, user IDs, etc.
5. Once done , select your enviroment from the drop down at the top of postman to activate it.

- Tip:
Once your enviroment is set up you can reference variables in your request using {{variable_name}}.

## 10. Testing and Automation
So far , you have learned how to make and organize requests in postman.
But what if you want to automatically check that your API is working the way it should every single time?
That is here tests and automatios comes i 
Postman let you write small scripts that run after each request, to validate the response or trigger a follow up action.
### writing your first test
Every equest in postman has a tests tab it is where you can write java script based checks.

lets see an example:

1. Open any request (like a GET request to https://jsonplaceholde.typicode.com/posts/1).
2. Go to the tests tab (right beside the Body tab)
3.  Paste this simple script 

```
pm.test("Status code is 200", function () {
    pm.response.to.have.status(200);
});

 ```
 4. Click send
 After the response loads. scroll down to test result section, you will see whether the test passed or failed.

 - Tip: you can add multiple tsts in one request to check different things. Like response time,content type, or specific JSON values.

 ### Automating with collection runer 
 If you have multiple requests saved in a collection, you can run them all automatically one after te other using collection runner.

 Steps 
 1. Open your collection
 2. Click the Run botton
 3. Choose the enviroment if any
 4. Click start Run
 postman will execute each request in sequence, and show whic ones passed or failed based on your tests.

 This is super useful in testing API before deployment ,or checking that changes didnt break anything ( a process known as regression testing).
  
## 11 Conclusion
And that is it. You have just gone through the basics of postman.
You have learned What postman is , how to make different kind of API requests from GET to DELETE.
You have also explored how to:
- Use headers, parameters, and enviromental variables
- Organize your work with collections
- Automate things using tests and Collection Runner

At this point you should feel comfortable navigating postman and understanding how it fits into the workflow of API testing and Documentation.

But remember, this is just a beginner guide 
The goal here wasn't to make you an expert overnight , but to help you understand the foundation.

From here you can explore advanced features like :

- Generating and publishing documentation automatically
- Setting up mock servers 
- Using monitors for scheduled tests
- Integrating postman with Github or CI/CO pipelines.
